7
eludoM
AHSA
are to be given. Even pregnant women and lactating mothers up to six
months are entitled to get food supplements in the anganwadi centres.
u Weighing the baby and informing the family of the level of
malnutrition is another important anganwadi service.
u The anganwadi is also the site where the Village Health and Nutrition
Day (VHND) is conducted. The ANM visits every month and the
child is given immunisation, Vitamin A, paediatric iron tablets,
Oral Rehydration Salts (ORS) packets or drugs needed for illness
management.
Note
Wasted expenditure on unnecessary services is also an issue. Families tend
to spend a lot of money in commercial health foods which are very costly.
This money is better spent in buying cheap, lower cost locally available
nutritious foods. Tonics and health drinks are also a waste for the poor family.
Unnecessary and costly treatments by local doctors for the recurrent bouts
of diarrhoea and minor colds and coughs could also be a drain. One of the
important services that you can perform is in making people aware that such
expenditures are unnecessary.
Counselling on Malnutrition
All the above messages are important for managing malnutrition also. But
there are too many points to list out and the family members may not register
it. Also, many of the messages may not be applicable to that particular child, or
may not be possible for that family. For these reasons, we have to do it in two
steps – first an analysis of why a child is malnourished and once we have an
understanding of this, then a dialogue with the family to see what can be done.
For an analysis, we need to know the following:
• What is the nutritional status of child – is it normal, underweight,
moderately underweight or severely underweight?
• What is the child being fed as compared to what needs to be given?
• What is the recent history of child’s illness, and whether enough has been
done to treat it promptly and to prevent further illness?
• What is the family’s access to the three key services? (ICDS, Health
Services and Public Distribution Services)
Skill in Eliciting Information
There is a skill of asking each question so as to get the right information.
What the child is being fed
• Ask specifically what was fed in the last one day, starting from now and
recalling backwards, till the previous day.
10 Simple Skills that Save Lives