Part
A
4 Prevent illness: Recurrent illness is a major cause of malnutrition. There are
six important things to remember which could prevent illness:
(a) Handwashing: before feeding the child, before preparing the child’s
food, and after cleaning up the child who has passed stools. This is the
single most useful measure to prevent recurrent diarrhoea.
(b) Drinking water to be boiled. Though useful for everyone, it is of
ppaarrttiiccuullaarr iimmppoorrttaannccee ttoo tthhee mmaallnnoouurriisshheedd cchhiilldd wwiitthh rreeccuurrrreenntt ddiiaarrrrhhooeeaa..
(c) Full immunisation of the child: Tuberculosis, diphtheria, pertussis and
measles are all prevented by immunisation and are the diseases that cause
severe malnutrition. In malnourished children, these diseases are more
common and life threatening, than in normal children.
(d) Vitamin A: To be given along with measles vaccine in the ninth month
and then repeated once every six months till five years of age. This too
reduces infections and night blindness, all of which is more common in
malnourished children.
(e) Avoid persons with infections, especially with a cough and cold picking
up the child, and handling the child, or even coming near the child during
the illness. This does not apply to mother, but even she should be more
rigorous in handwashing and more careful in handling the baby.
(f) Preventing Malaria: In districts with malaria the baby should sleep under
an insecticide treated bed net. Malaria too is a major cause of malnutrition.
You should encourage parents and other family members to spend time with
the child as it matters a lot. Time has to be spent in feeding the child. Time has
to be spent in playing and talking with the child. Such children eat and absorb
food better.
5 Access to health services
u Access to health services makes for prompt treatment of illness.
On the very first day of the illness, if you help the mother decide
on whether it is a minor illness for which home remedy would be
adequate, or to be reffrered to a doctor, such a decision would save
lives. Early treatment would prevent malnutrition.
u Access to contraceptive services is important. If the age of mother is
less than 19, or the gap between two children is less than three years,
there is a much higher chance of the children being malnourished.
6 Access to anganwadi services
u The anganwadi provides a food supplement for the child up to the
age of 5. This could be a cooked meal, or in the form of take – home
rations. Malnourished children are to be given additional food
supplements. For children below the age of two, take – home rations
Child Health & Nutrition 9