7
eludoM
AHSA
it is many. Do not jump immediately to some point
and start giving your advice. Ask all the questions,
listen to the replies fully, think about it and then
only give your advice.
Discuss what measures are needed in each case and how this is to be
conveyed?
Skill of Counselling
How to give advice
• First praise the mother for how well she is coping with the child and
reinforce the good practices she is following. Praise must always precede
any other advice.
• Then deliver each message as needed for that child in the form of a
suggestion and ask whether they could implement it. Dialogue with the
family explaining why the step is needed and how they could achieve
it. If they are convinced, they would agree. If not convinced or unable to
agree, move on to the next message. It takes more than one visit and one
dialogue for families to agree, even if it was possible.
• Then point out any harmful or wasteful practices, explaining why you
say so.
• Arrange for a follow-up visit to see how many practices have changed and
to further reinforce the messages. Each family with a malnourished child
needs to be met about once or twice a month.
• Arrange for mother and child to meet the ANM or the doctor as required.
Such a visit is required in the following circumstances:
u Any child who is severely underweight. If, in addition, there are
danger signs, admission in a facility which manages such children
would be desirable.
u Any child who is underweight, who does not gain weight even after a
few months of trying to follow the advice.
u Any child who is underweight, who has fever, or chronic cough or
persistent anaemia.
Even if the family is not going to see the doctor or ANM, do inform the
Anganwadi Worker (AWW) and the ANM so that they can follow-up too.
This work is equally their work also.
How you should NOT give advice
Do not prescribe advice without dialogue—just telling families what to do
would not help…
Do not give very broad and what can be perceived as ‘insulting’ advice like
– “you must take care of your child, or you must keep the child clean, or you
must give nutritious food etc.”
12 Simple Skills that Save Lives