7
eludoM
AHSA
Who is at higher risk?: In areas where malaria is highly prevalent, pregnant
mothers and malnourished children are at greater risk.
How to suspect malaria: Any person living in a malaria affected area, who
develops fever must be suspected as having malaria. If fever is with chills and
rigor and headache, it is even more likely.
How to confirm: There are two ways of confirming malaria:
• Using the Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) kit the patient’s blood can be tested
for malaria (Please see Annexe 4). If the test is positive then the patient
has malaria.
• You should also make a blood smear. (Please see Annexe 5). The parasite
can be seen in the blood smear Sometimes the blood smears can be
negative, and a repeat smear is required.
RDT and Smears are to be taken before starting treatment. All ASHAs
working in a block with a high incidence of malaria need to be trained for
taking smears for malaria.
Treating Malaria
1. Give paracetamol for fever. Also sponging with warm water to bring
down temperature when needed.
2. If RDT is positive for malaria- Give chloroquine or Artesunate
Combination treatment (ACT) drug as recommended. (Annexe 7) The
dose of the drug depends of the age group. The exact dosage schedule is
given in Annexe 6. Nowadays the recommendation is to treat for malaria
only if the test is positive. If the test is not available, or cannot be done, it
is permissible to give a course of chloroquine. This would still be needed
in many areas.
3. If despite treatment fever does not begin to come down within two or
three days, or persists even after a week, referral becomes mandatory.
Referral to ANM or doctor is necessary if there is no response and fever continues
or if patient becomes delirious.
Prevention of Malaria
Mosquitoes thrive in warm and wet climates. There
are many types of mosquitoes, but only very few of
them transmit the disease. The mosquito that transmits
malaria is called Anopheles and it bites almost
exclusively at night. It does not bite during the day.
That is why sleeping under a bed net is a good way of
preventing bites. The mosquito that spreads malaria
breeds in clean water. That is why during rainy season,
where water collects, this forms a good breeding place
for mosquitoes.
60Simple Skills that Save Lives
7
eludoM
AHSA
or if patient becomes delirious.