7
eludoM
AHSA
Pills should not be advised for women who are breastfeeding.
OCP are available in your drug kit, and at the Sub-Centre, Primary Health
Centre (PHC) and Community Health Centre (CHC).
Emergency Contraceptive Pills
ASHA does not start women on a pill, but could provide follow-up once
it is started. These are for emergency use, when the couple has not used a
contraceptive and have had unprotected sex. It can also be used in instances
of rape, or accidental breaking of the condom. The woman must take the
pill as soon as possible after unprotected sex. The pills are effective within
72hours of intercourse. The pills will not work if the woman has already
become pregnant from having sex more than three days earlier. These pills
are available in your drug kit, at the Sub-Centre, PHC and CHC. These pills
are to be used only as an emergency method and you should advise users to
shift to regular methods of family planning.
Condom: The condom is a narrow bag of thin rubber that the man wears on
his penis during sex. Because the man’s semen stays in the bag, the sperm
cannot enter the woman’s body, and she cannot get pregnant. The condom is
a useful device to be used as a contraceptive and to protect against Sexually
Transmitted Infections (STIs) and HIV. It is also useful for couples where the
male is a migrant and returns home for short durations.
Men most often buy condoms from shops. Since you have a supply of
condoms in your drug kit, women may feel more confident in approaching
you to obtain condoms.
The Intrauterine Contraceptive Device (IUCD, Copper-T, the Loop)
The IUCD is a small object or device that is inserted into the uterus and
prevents the man’s sperm from fertilising the woman’s egg. The IUCD can
stay in the uterus for up to 10 years. The most common IUCDs are made of
copper.
Remember:
8 A condom is to be used every time the woman has a
sexual encounter to prevent from pregnancy, STIs
and HIV.
8 A condom is to be used only once. A condom that has
been used before is more likely to break.
8 Condoms are to be kept in a cool, dry place away from
sunlight. Condoms that are from old or torn package are
more likely to break.
40Simple Skills that Save Lives