Part
B
Who should not use an IUCD?
You should not counsel IUCD use if the woman:
• Has never been pregnant.
• Has anaemia (Low Hb).
• Is in danger of getting a Sexually Transmitted Infection. (This includes any
woman who has more than one partner, or whose partner may have other
sex partners.)
• Has ever had an infection in her tubes or uterus, or an infection after
giving birth or having an abortion.
• Has had a pregnancy in her tubes.
• Has a lot of bleeding and pain during monthly bleeding.
Common side-effects: The woman may have some light bleeding during the
first week after getting an IUCD. Some women also have longer, heavier and
more painful monthly bleeding, but this usually stops after the first three
months.
Who should insert an IUCD: An IUCD must be inserted by a trained
Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM), nurse or a doctor after doing a pelvic
(internal) examination. The best time to have the IUCD inserted is during
the monthly bleeding/period. The IUCD can be inserted within 48 hours of
delivery by a trained healthcare provider, by a method known as Postpartum
Intrauterine Contraceptive Device (PPIUCD). However if the IUCD cannot
be inserted within 48 hours of delivery for any reason or complications then
it is best to wait for six weeks for the uterus to return to its normal size and
shape before getting an IUCD.
What to watch for: Occasionally an IUCD will slip out of place. If this
happens, it will not be effective in preventing pregnancy, so it is important
Teaching a woman to check the IUD strings
• Wash hands.
• Squat down and reach as far as she can into the vagina with two fingers.
Feel for the IUD strings, but do not pull them.
• Take fingers out and wash her hands again.
for the woman to learn to check her IUCD to make sure it is
still in place. Most IUCDs have 2 thread-like strings attached
which hang down into the vagina. The mother should be
counselled to check the strings after each monthly bleeding to
make sure the IUCD is in place.
Women’s Reproductive Health 41