7
eludoM
AHSA
4. Assessing the Sick Child
Common illnesses in the young child could include: diarrhoea, cough and
cold, and fever. Each of these conditions will be discussed in the following
chapters. However, before you begin to learn about each specific illness, you
need to know about the danger signs in a child.
Objectives of the session
By the end of the session, the ASHA will learn about:
• How to identify general danger signs among sick children.
• Be able to recognise symptoms of common illnesses.
• Enable prompt referral.
What are danger signs?
Danger signs indicate serious illness. These can occur in many illnesses. Some
danger signs may occur without any relationship to the type of illness. For
example fever, diarrhoea, pneumonia, meningitis or malaria can all produce
lethargy or unconsciousness. These illnesses can also make the child so sick
that the child is not able to drink any fluids. These are called general danger
signs. The presence of even one general danger sign is enough to indicate
a severe disease. A danger sign calls for immediate referral. Where signs of
common illness like cold and cough, fever, and diarrhoea are present without
any of the danger signs, and where there is no doctor, you could provide
some home-based care to the child and keep a watch for signs that indicate
the need for referral.
What are the questions to be asked when seeing a sick child?
Every child who is seen for an illness should be checked for the presence of
the following general danger signs:
• Not able to drink or breastfeed
• Vomits everything
• Has convulsions
• Is lethargic or unconscious.
How to assess a sick child for danger signs?
Step 1: ASK: Is the child able to drink or breastfeed?
A child has the sign “not able to drink or
breastfeed” if the child is not able to suck or
swallow when offered a drink or breast milk. If
the mother says that the child is not able to drink
or breastfeed, ask her to describe what happens
when she offers the child something to drink. For
20Simple Skills that Save Lives