7
eludoM
AHSA
iv. All fever cases that approach you and are unable to go to the primary
health centre within a day, should be screened using RDT and blood
slides. Fever cases which turn out to be RDT positive should be provided
treatment immediately. You should store the positive RDT along with the
blood slide for Quality Assurance (QA) check at a later date. For cases
which are RDT negative, you should send blood slides to the laboratory.
For those with a positive result, you can treat the cases following the
drug regimen in which you are trained.
v. All fever cases should be given paracetamol and fever managed as per
the guidelines. The persons who test positive for malaria would be
given with either chloroquine drug or ACT drugs (depending on the
instructions in that area) followed by primaquine for radical treatment.
Diary
vi. Whenever you do a blood test or give a drug you should make a record
of it in your diary. You should, provide the information during the
monthly ASHA review meeting to the ANM or to your supervisor.
If payment is being made for this work, you may be also required to
maintain a register.
vii. Transport of slides and obtaining the result of the test: The
slides collected by you should be delivered to the sub-
centre by you or by anyone whom you request, on a day to
day basis. These slides should then be transported to the
PHC lab preferably twice a week, or less by the MPW (M)
and if not, the MPW (F). The results should be conveyed to
you by the MPW (M) and if not the MPW (F).
viii. If there is a pregnant woman in a high malaria area, you
should facilitate her getting a insecticide treated bed net
at the time of the first antenatal care check up and follow
up to see that she uses it. After delivery you should ensure
that the baby from the time of birth also sleeps under an
insecticide treated bed-net.
ix. If a pregnant woman gets high fever and chills, ensure that she is taken to
see a doctor. You could start Chloroquine or ACT immediately if there is a
delay in seeing a doctor.. Do NOT give primaquine to a pregnant woman
or a child below one year of age.
62Simple Skills that Save Lives